Peer Review Framework for Predictive Analytics
in Humanitarian Response
MODEL REPORT:
Trigger for OCHA Anticipatory
Action on Drought in Chad
Trigger developed by the UN OCHA Centre for Humanitarian Data
June 2023

Model Report:
Trigger for OCHA Anticipatory Action on Drought in Chad
1. Background
This document summarizes the documentation and findings of the peer review of the model
used by the UN Central Emergency Response Fund to trigger the drought anticipatory action
framework in Chad. The model is a go-no-go trigger mechanism designed to anticipate
humanitarian impacts of seasonal drought in a sub-region of Chad.
The review has been conducted between January and May 2023.
2. Main Findings and Recommendations
You can find all the documentation regarding the model, its application and the review process
at the following links:
●
The Model Card describes the version of the model that was endorsed by humanitarian
action in November 2022 and was completed in January 2023.
●
The Model Evaluation Matrix was completed in February 2023 by Carlos Osorio-Ramírez,
Associate Professor at Universidad Nacional de Colombia.
●
The Implementation Plan was completed in February 2023. It summarizes how the
trigger model is used to trigger anticipatory action and the agreed activation protocol.
●
The Ethical Matrix aims to identify all stakeholders and potential issues regarding the
intended use of the model. The Ethical Matrix was completed in May 2023 by Anna Lena
Huhn, Southern Africa Regional Anticipatory Action Advisor at the United Nations World
Food Programme.
A summary of the main findings and recommendations is provided below.
2.1 Technical Review
Intended Use
Overall, the use cases are well-described and adequately explained. The documentation of the
limitations of the model could be extended in its description, as is the case of the biomass
anomaly and its connection with scenarios like extreme dryness or late onset.

Model Development and Documentation
It is advisable to provide further documentation on the different data sources used by the team
to validate the selection of indicators and estimate the performance of the model. Also, some
data is not available in a machine readable format and it would be good to explain how the team
dealt with this issue.
Model Evaluation
It is unclear what is an acceptable level of accuracy for the model. The team should better
articulate how the performance benchmark was established and how the performance metrics
were evaluated and presented to the final stakeholders.
Operational Readiness
It would be good to expand the analysis of the missed activations of the models and the
potential false alarms that the model could be providing.
2.2 Ethical Review
False Negatives
A false negative occurs when no drought impact is predicted but drought conditions occur.
The team could consider additional mitigation strategies such as the use of citizen science or
ground observations to complement the forecast-based trigger.
Insufficient Data
Insufficient data refers to the gaps in impact data used to verify the forecast predictions.
Insufficient data might limit the precise prediction of forecasted humanitarian impact and
expose local populations to adverse humanitarian impact induced by a drought event, requiring
a large-scale humanitarian response ex-post. The team should consider the feasibility of adding
further vulnerability layers in future iterations of the model.
False Positives
A false positive happens when drought impact is predicted but no drought conditions occur.
Anticipatory action follows the ‘no regret’ principle, but a false alarm can still lead to inadequate
resource allocation with a high potential impact on affected communities. The anticipatory
action framework could indicate a precise mitigation strategy in a clearer manner.
Lack of Trust and Ownership
Lack of trust and ownership refers to the limited involvement of local and regional authorities in
the model design and validation. This may lead to little ownership and trust put into the model
and eventually to political blockages in activations. In future framework versions a clear strategy

for the involvement of affected populations and an approach to accountability to affected
populations should be identified.
Lack of Transparency
Lack of transparency refers to the algorithms not being made available or not being transparent.
The anticipatory action framework should reflect clearer strategies to engage with local leaders
to better understand what is happening on the ground and obtain early buy-in. Mitigation
strategy for a potential lack of transparency should be expanded in the model card and/or the
anticipatory action framework.
Inaction
Inaction refers to the situation in which drought impact is predicted but no action is taken.
Inaction in case of trigger activation is unlikely, given the pre-allocated financing attached to it
and the UN-validated anticipatory action framework. Inaction might nevertheless be a
possibility, if government or local authorities block the roll-out of interventions on the ground or
in
case
of
conflict
upsurge.
The
team
could
consider
adding
a
consensus-based
decision-making option around activation or non-activation in the event of specific events or
situational context not considered in the model design (e.g., higher levels of vulnerability or
increase in armed conflict, etc.)
Feedback
The Centre invites individuals and organizations working in the humanitarian, academic,
research and private sector to engage with us on the peer review process. Please send feedback
on the Framework to centrehumdata@un.org.
