Trigger Mechanism for
Anticipatory Action in the Central American Dry Corridor (CADC)
Technical Note
Version 3 (01 March 2024)
Anticipatory action is planned to preemptively intervene against drought-related impacts in the
Central American Dry Corridor (CADC) that runs through Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and
El Salvador. A framework was developed collaboratively by the regional and national partners
and the Centre for Humanitarian Data (CHD). It includes pre-agreed financing, pre-selected
interventions, and a trigger for automated activation. This note describes the technical aspects
of the trigger mechanism.
Trigger Development
The CHD led the development of the technical development of the trigger mechanism with
inputs from regional and local partners . The requirements for the mechanism were identified
through conversations with the regional and national partners. Options for the mechanism were
defined, validated against historical data, discussed with stakeholders, and tuned over several
iterations. The version of the mechanism discussed in this note has been approved by the
humanitarian country team and is currently being monitored for potential activations in 2024.
Trigger Overview
The Anticipatory Action (AA) project focuses on the 4 primary countries through which the
CADC spans: Nicaragua, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras. The triggering mechanism is
based on the seasonal rainfall forecast with threshold set for individual countries based on
historical seasonal rainfall forecasts and estimated return periods. Based on the requirements
from operational partners the following analytical decisions had to be made:

Table 1. Key trigger design decisions
Decision Type
Decision made
1.
Event Type
MJJA & SON seasonal rainfall deficit
2.
Geographic level of analysis
Country level
3.
Forecast lead time
Up to 4 months
4.
Activation thresholds
1 in 4 year rainfall deficit
5.
Forecast to use
ECMWF SEAS 51/ National Forecast
(INSIVUMEH for Guatemala only)
The rationale and description of each of these decisions is provided in the next section with
more additional details provided in the Appendix section.
Rationale
Event Type
The trigger is designed to monitor seasonal drought as measured by forecasted cumulative
seasonal rainfall deficit. Country and regional partners identified the two key seasons for
monitoring as the Primera (May - August) and Postrera (September - November) seasons. If
critical rainfall deficits/drought conditions are forecasted in either window, the AA framework is
to be activated.
Geographic level of analysis
The analysis and monitoring occurs at the country level. All countries are monitored
simultaneously with the same framework and decision logic, but can be activated independently
and at different times. To allow operational flexibility in targeting, the analysis was conducted
over the entirety of each country to ensure that no area of possible intervention/activity was
excluded.
Forecast used
The use of ECMWF, IRI, and national forecast data were assessed for all four countries during
the design process.
Where possible, the use of national forecast data was prioritized.
Guatemala was the only country for which in-county partners could secure national forecast
data. Therefore, the agreed upon forecast data sources for the trigger are:
●
Nicaragua, Honduras, El Salvador - ECMWF Seasonal Forecast
Page 2 of 10

●
Guatemala - Official national forecast provided the Instituto nacional
de Sismología,
Vulcanologia, Meteorologia e Hidrología (INSIVUMEH) for all months except May where
the national forecast does not provide a prediction for publication month as required by
the implementing partners (Figure 1). For this month ECMWF Seasonal will be used.
For a more in depth discussion of the forecast data source please see the appendix below.
Forecast Lead Time
The forecast lead times used for the framework monitoring
were decided based on the
operational requirements of implementing partners and constraints of forecast data products.
Each monthly global ECMWF forecast publication provides 7 monthly lead times including the
forecast for the month of forecast publication whereas INSIVUMEH forecast provides 6 monthly
lead times with the first month being the month after publication of the forecast. During the
design process the CHD provided analysis and specific thresholds for each possible lead time
and provided the recommendation to adopt the shortest lead time possible that still would
provide the partners with sufficient time to implement activities.
After reviewing all activities, stakeholders/partners agreed to the following lead times and
monitoring periods:
Table 2. Trigger matrix
Trigger
Potential
activation
points
Indicator
Data Source
Trigger
Primera Window
(Window A)
Mar
April
May
MJJA
seasonal
forecast
Global
Forecast
(ECMWF)
or
National Forecast
MJJA
precipitation
<= 1 in 4 year RP
Postrera Window
(Window B)
Jun
Jul
Aug
SON
seasonal
forecast
Global
Forecast
(ECMWF)
or
National Forecast
SON precipitation <=
1 in 4 year RP
Page 3 of 10

Figure 1. Time periods of interest in blue will be monitored from forecast data published in yellow. May
is highlighted in green due to the overlap.
Thresholds
Thresholds were based on a 1 in 4 year return period (RP) event and calculated independently
for each country. For each year of historical seasonal forecast
data (1981-2022) the total
seasonal rainfall (for each season) was calculated and averaged to each of the countries
boundaries for each lead time. This historical record was then used to calculate the threshold
that corresponded to 25 % activation rate (or 1 in 4 year RP). This process was run on both
ECMWF seasonal and national forecast (for Guatemala) data separately.
Thresholds were
calculated per country, activation window, lead time, and forecast data source to compensate
for any bias in forecast values across lead times (see Appendix for additional details).
Monitoring
The CHD is responsible for monitoring the seasonal forecast and updating the activation status
on a monthly basis with an automated email alert to relevant stakeholders. As the ECMWF
Seasonal forecast is published on the 5th of each month, the trigger notification for Nicaragua,
Honduras, and El Salvador are distributed on the 5th of each month. INSIVUMEH provided a date
range for the Guatemala national forecast publication as the 5th-10th each month. Therefore,
the Guatemala trigger status update is made upon receival of this forecast. No cutoff date has
been established for using the national forecast in Guatemala, but is at the discretion of CERF
and partners based on operational requirements. The monitoring is automated through a GitHub
action available in this GitHub repository.
Page 4 of 10

Appendix
Forecast (Lead Time & Data Source)
Data sources & Accessibility: to monitor seasonal drought, seasonal forecasts were required.
The trigger was designed with flexibility to incorporate national forecast data sources
where/when available and global data sets when no national forecasts could be obtained. Thus
far Guatemala’s national forecast provided by INSIVUMEH was the only national forecast data
set that could be obtained by in-country partners.
For Nicaragua, Guatemala, and El Salvador where no national forecast data could be secured,
ECMWF and IRI global forecasts were evaluated. ECMWF was eventually chosen over IRI for the
following reasons:
●
ECMWF provides hindcast/forecast data from 1981 to present compared to IRI which is
only available from 2017 onwards. The longer historical record of ECMWF allows the
calculation of
activation rates at different thresholds with a much higher degree of
confidence.
●
ECMWF provides monthly total precipitation which allows flexible temporal aggregation
whereas IRI only provides trimester (3-month) probabilities
●
ECMWF is released earlier in the month (5th compared to 16th)
●
ECMWF units are easily converted to total precipitation which is easier for stakeholders
to understand than tercile probabilities
●
ECMWF seasonal forecast data obtained from the MARS catalog can be provided at 0.4
degrees resolution which is a higher resolution than IRI data which can only be obtained
at 1 degree resolution.
The ECMWF Seasonal forecast is made public through the Copernicus Data Store (CDS) on the
5th of every month. This publicly available data has a resolution of 1 degree and contains 6
months of lead time (including publication month). The full ECMWF SEAS5 historical forecast
data set which includes 7 months of lead time and has a resolution of 0.4 degrees is available to
World Meteorological Organization (WMO) members through the ECMWF MARS catalog. For
up-to-date ECMWF data with the full 7 months of lead time at 0.4 degrees resolution the CHD
receives the seasonal forecast data directly from ECMWF.
Operational requirements:
AA partners compiled a list of required start times by activity and agency (Figure 2). After
receiving the required lead times by agencies and conducting a deep dive session it was
decided to remove the February forecast publication from the Primera monitoring window and
September from the Postrera monitoring window. This was done based on the activity timeline
(Figure 2) and to standardize the monitoring period and probability of activation across
countries and while reducing uncertainty in trigger mechanism.
Page 5 of 10

Figure 2. Timeline of activities and required activation months
Thresholds/Trigger
As no drought impact data was available in the regions, the thresholds were set primarily based
on historical activation rates/return period level calculations. The threshold was finally set to
activate only if the seasonal rainfall was forecasted to be at least a 1 in 4 year return period level
deficit at any lead time. The calculated thresholds based on the 4 year return period levels are
presented below in tables 3 and 4 for the Primera and Postrera season, respectively.
Page 6 of 10

Table 3. Primera Thresholds
Table 4. Postrera Thresholds
Page 7 of 10

The analytical method for historical analysis/thresholding can be conceptualized as two steps:
1. Data aggregation, 2. Return period/activation rate calculation & bias correction.
Aggregation
Thresholds were designed using ECMWF SEAS5 seasonal precipitation forecast from the public
Copernicus Data Store & MARS catalog as well as the national seasonal precipitation forecast
for Guatemala provided by INSIVUMEH . All available historical forecast data from 1981-2022
was downloaded and processed for historical analyses. The data was downloaded as monthly
precipitation rate estimates over the area of interest, for each month the mean of the 51
ensemble members was calculated at the pixel level to obtain 1 raster per month.
The average monthly precipitation was then extracted for every month and lead time for each
country by an area-weighted mean statistic. The zonal mean statistic was chosen as the
aggregation method for simplification purposes.
The monthly zonal statistics were then
aggregated temporally to the seasonal windows (MJJA & SON) for each lead time combination
available.
Threshold Setting & Bias Correction
From the yearly historical data, the 25th percentile (1 in 4 year RP level) was calculated for each
country,
window, and lead time. The percentile calculation was performed at each lead time
separately as different lead times can be biased in a number of ways. For example, across all
four countries of interest, we see that the ECMWF seasonal forecast systematically predicts
lower rainfall quantities at longer lead times during the Primera season (Figure 3).
By
calculating the percentiles for each lead time separately we ensure equal probability across all
relevant forecast publication months.
Page 8 of 10

Figure 3. Forecasted rainfall bias by country and lead time during the primera season (ECMWF Seasonal).
It must be noted that by setting a threshold at the 4 year return period level and monitoring each
publication month/lead time independently, the joint probability of activation across any
forecast publication months rises substantially. Additionally, when considering, the probability of
activation across either season (Primera/Postrera)
this joint probability of activation rises
further. These joint activation rates were discussed in the CADC AA Deep dive session led by
CERF & the CHD and were considered in the final decision to choose a 1 in 4 year RP level for
monitoring at each forecast publication date. Table 5 presents the joint activation rate across all
lead times for each season as well as combined activation rates across seasons based on the
thresholds and activation points presented in tables 3 & 4.
Table 5. Joint Return Periods/Activation Rates
Page 9 of 10

Observation Indicators Consideration/Exclusion
Observational crop/vegetation monitoring with indicators such as Vegetative Health Index (VHI)
& Agricultural Stress Index System (ASIS) were considered, but left out of the framework as data
obtained during the identified critical seasons (as opposed to before) can’t preemptively inform
or support the bulk of AA activities focused on agricultural provided by operational partners
which must be implemented before the growing period commences.
The use of observational vegetative health indicators was initially proposed by the partners in
early iterations of the framework.
After initial investigation of VHI and ASIS by the CHD
according to various framework revisions suggested by FAO, FAO recommended removing ASIS
from consideration as it is meant to be monitored during certain stages of the growing season
which do not align with lead time/operational requirements of the agencies. The use of VHI to
capture pre-existing vulnerabilities and thereby condition triggers was suggested, but a coherent
strategy that could align with operational requirements of agencies was not found or adopted.
Areas for Improvement in future iterations
The following two potential areas of improvement were identified and may be considered in
future iterations of the framework:
●
Integration of additional national forecast data sources.
●
Observational indicators such as VHI could be further explored with key inputs from
partners.
Contact the OCHA Centre for Humanitarian Data via Zachary Arno, Data Scientist at
zachary.arno@un.org with any questions or feedback.
Page 10 of 10
