DOCUMENT RESUME
ED 405 665
EC 303 368
AUTHOR
Freund, Maxine
TITLE
Inclusion Forum, 1994.
INSTITUTION
George Washington Univ., Washington,
DC. Dept. of
Teacher Preparation and Special
Education.
SPONS AGENCY
Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative
Services (ED), Washington, DC.
PUB DATE
94
CONTRACT
H024D10019
NOTE
10p.; A product of the Community
Integration project.
For the 1993 volume, see EC 302 944.
PUB TYPE
Collected Works
Serials (022)
Reports
Descriptive (141)
JOURNAL CIT
Inclusion Forum; v2 n1-2 1994
EDRS PRICE
MF01/PC01 Plus Postage.
DESCRIPTORS
Community Programs; *Cooperative Programs;
*Disabilities; Early Childhood Education;
*Inclusive
Schools; *Inservice Teacher Education;
*Mainstreaming; Normalization (Disabilities);
Parent
Participation; Preschool Education;
*Social
Integration; *Training Methods
ABSTRACT
These two newsletter issues focus on training
strategies for developing more inclusive programs
for children with
disabilities and for developing collaborative programs.
An interview
with Dr. Barbara Wolfe addresses successful
inservice teacher
training strategies. Additional information in the first issue
includes guidelines for empowering parents to participate in
inclusion training (based on the Partnerships for Inclusion Project,
North Carolina) and suggestions for involving-the community, (based
on the Community Connections Project, Washington, D.C.). The second
issue has a brief article on the importance of building a common
vision for successful collaboration,
interpersonal skills and
collaboration (based on the Meeting House Cooperative Preschool,
Alexandria, Virginia), developing collaborative organizations (based
on the Inclusion through Transdisciplinary Team Project in
Idaho),
and developing inclusive communities for young children with
disabilities (based on the Welcome Everywhere
Project in Indiana).
(DB)
***********************************************************************
Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the
best that can be made
from the original document.
***********************************************************************

Inclusion Forum
Vol. 2, No. 1
Spring/Summer
Vol. 2, No. 2
Fall/Winter
1994
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
Office of Educational Research and Improvement
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION
CENTER (ERIC)
00(h..is document has been reproduced as
received from the person or organization
originating it
O Minor changes have been made to improve
reproduction quality.
Points of view or opinions stated in this docu-
ment do not necessarily represent official
OERI position or policy.
Inclusion Forum
Dept. of Teacher Preparation and
Special Education
The George Washington University
2201 G Street, N.W., #524
Washington, DC 20052
BEST COPYMORE

k, IILILLL
CIP/The George Washington University Information Line
SPRING/SUMMER 1994
VOL. 2, No. 1
SPOTLIGHT ON TRAINING STRATEGIES
FOLLOW-UP: A KEY COMPONENT OF SUCCESSFUL TRAINING
Dr. Barbara Wolfe, a trainer-of-trainers exemplar,
is currently on the faculty of the Department of
Special Education at the University of Wiscon-
sin-Eau Claire. Prior to university teaching, she spent
fifteen years providing inservice training on inclusion to
early childhood professionals. We would like to share some
of Barbara's thoughts on training gleaned from a recent
telephone interview.
You have conducted research on best practices in
inservice education. What did you find most helped
teachers implement new ideas in their classrooms?
Factors that most helped teachers use new ideas in their
classroom were (1) useful handouts/materials, (2) relevant
content that addressed an existing need. (3) follow-up
support, (4) practical content that could be applied immedi-
ately and (5) an effective trainer.
Did any of these findings surprise you?
Two were surprisingthe importance of handouts (i.e.
practical. relevant handouts) and the impact of the trainer
on inservice outcomes. Participants defined effective
trainers as knowledgeable, well prepared, credible, enthusi-
astic and able to use a variety of techniques including
hands-on and interactive strategies. The good news about
these characteristics is that people can learn themthat is.
training isn't an inherent trait but rather a learned skill.
Let's talk for a minute about follow-up support. Could
you define what you mean by follow-up?
Broadly speaking, follow-up can be defined as strate-
gies and events that take place following the planned
workshop experience. Some examples are a "back home"
plan to try on the job, a follow-up class or workshop, on-
site coaching by peers or trainers or a follow-up letter with
resource articles.
Why do you think follow-up is so important in
inservice education?
Learning is a process, not something that happens in a
one-time training event. Change takes place over time and
requires a focused effort for new ideas to be integrated into
ongoing practice. Follow-up provides a strategy for focused
effort over time, thereby increasing the chance that new
ideas will actually become on-the-job behaviors.
What follow-up strategies have you found to be most
effective?
In my research, not too many participants had experi-
enced follow-up but those who had preferred (1) observing
someone else demonstrating the new idea, (2) having on-
the-job assistance or (3) participating in small group
discussions with fellow staff or an administrator.
Two other specific follow-up strategies that can be
offered to participants on a voluntary basis are: (1) coach-
ing (peer or expert coaching) which is a labor intensive,
one-on-one strategy where the coach serves as a mirror
through which the teacher can examine her behavior, and
(2) peer support group which brings participants back
together to talk about the successes they have experienced
and to brainstorm solutions that support implementation
efforts.
Earlier you spoke of "back home" plans as a follow-
up strategy. Can you expand on that?
A "back home" plan is like a personal learning plan. It
is a good strategy for intensive full-day or multi-day
classes. Each individual completes a plan indicating
personal goals, what they will do to accomplish their goals,
and possibly, products that will demonstrate accomplish-
ment. Trainers can get feedback on the participants'
progress toward their goals by doing follow-up visits,
calling the site, or requesting video or written records.
It is sometimes difficult to motivate participants to
complete a back home plan after a long training day, so I
have tried using an "Aha" sheet where participants write
down new ideas throughout the session. Then when they
make their plan, I have them limit their ideas to 3 or 4
things to try at home. We usually take up to a half-hour at
the end of the training course to develop an individual or
team "back home" plan. Carry-over is sometimes increased
by having participants verbally report their plan to someone
else, or to the whole group. Somehow when you say it
aloud, you feel more committed to action.
Is there anything else you would like to say?
Helping teachers learn new skills and incorporate them
into the classroom requires an intensive system of training
that utilizes multiple training strategies, including opportu-
nities to observe, practice, receive feedback and talk about
the ideas. It is paramount that administrators are committed
to both the ideas being presented and the training design,
which might require an increase in release time for training,
planning or peer support.
3
For more information contact:
Dr. Barbara Wolfe
Department of Special Education
University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
Eau Claire, WI 54701
BEST COPY AVAILABLE

PAGE 2
INCLUSION FORUM
SPRING/SUMMER 1994
EMPOWERING PARENTS TO PARTICIPATE IN INCLUSION TRAINING
Arecent North
Carolina project
trained parents of
children with disabilities to
serve as inclusion specialists
through
41%,, k developing
Partnerships
for Inclusion
skills and
advocacy
participating in
inclusion training for
day care and other providers of services to children. This
training, designed and conducted primarily by experi-
enced parent advocates, was funded by the Partnerships
for Inclusion Project at the Frank Porter Graham Child
Development Center at the University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill.
The parents participating in the project represented a
variety of socio-economic and family backgrounds, had
children with different disabilities, and were located
throughout the state. The parents agreed to participate in
a two-day training session and follow-up activities.
Expenses and a small honorarium were given to partici-
pants.
The training sessions and follow-up activities were
designed to develop the participants' advocacy and
presentation skills by focusing on the following:
a working knowledge of the state's service delivery
system;
the ability to effectively present a personalized
rationale for inclusion;
a working knowledge of the basic rights of children
with disabilities;
the ability to work effectively within the system in
advocating for inclusion.
Several of the sessions focused on giving parents a
variety of "tools" to present their unique perspective on
inclusion. Topics included incorporating humor,
children's books and artwork, visual images and adult
education principles to support presentations. Adult
learning principles included giving audiences informa-
tion they could use (relevance), showing how the
information could be used to solve problems (practical-
ity) and convincing audiences of the need to learn
(motivation).
The parents left the two-day training with an "indi-
vidualized education plan" to help develop their presen-
tations. This written plan outlined the presentation
pieces that were in place, i.e., the "strengths," and the
pieces that needed to be developed, i.e., the "needs." As
follow up, smaller groups met with one of the parent
advocates. At these sessions, each parent trainee give a
presentation. The other trainees and the parent-advocate
acted as an audience of professionals who critiqued each
presentation. This role playing helped prepare the
trainees to present information before live audiences and
to answer probing questions. The inclusion specialists
now serve to link the parents to day care and related
training programs across North Carolina.
For more information contact:
Ralph C. Worthington, Sandy Steele andKatherine Favrot
Partnerships for Inclusion Project
East Carolina University
4N-66 Brody Medical Sciences Building
Greenville, NC 27858-4354
(919)816-2591
GIVING THE HELP THAT TH
In 1981, the
Social Integra-
tion Program
(SIP), which was
administered at Utah
State University,
began to serve
children with disabili-
ties in community-
based child care
centers. Its positive
results for children,
families and providers have led to subsequent projects to
assist preschool personnel in serving children with
disabilities. One of the biggest challenges facing com-
munity program inclusion efforts is providing the help
that is needed when it is needed. Although training
typically addresses many of the providers' anticipated
needs, unanticipated needs inevitably arise as services
are delivered to children and families.
To respond to providers' needs in a timely manner,
we have found no substitute for "being there." When
someone with special expertise in serving children with
disabilities and their families is present on a daily basis,
she/he can most easily develop the working relationships
necessary to help teams provide effective services.
Although on-site support is our preferred form of
technical assistance, we must often seek alternatives due
to factors such as time and distance. After a good
working relationship has been established, an itinerant
person can offer assistance using telecommunication
Li

VoL. 2, No. 1
INCLUSION FORUM,
PAGE 3
VALUES AND ATTITUDES FIRST
The Community Connec-
tions Project at The
George Washington
University recruits and trains
teams of child care providers
who then support the inclusion of
children with disabilities in their
programs. The project is founded
on the belief that all children with disabilities deserve
the option of attending community programs with their:
non-disabled peers. It is committed to supporting child
care personnel in their collaboration with other service
providers to meet the needs of all children in inclusive
_re*
MMENITY
NNECTIONS
NEED WHEN THEY NEED IT
options such as the telephone. For example, during
a weekly phone call to each site, the SIP consultant
and provider reviewed each child's progress and
together sought solutions to problems.
But sometimes a picture is needed to establish
the context in which the problem occurs. Two
strategies have proven advantageous in this situa-
tion. One is to "dialogue" through a videotape
exchange. First, the provider makes a video demon-
strating the problem and then the trainer responds
by making a video that demonstrates an alternative
practice. In the Early Ed Project, video exchange
helped providers increase child engagement in
small group activities by demonstrating alternative
strategies for child-adult interactions.
Another strategy, interactive television, allows
all parties to see what is happening as well as to
talk about it. Using the state's educational televi-
sion network, a speech and language pathologist in
a television studio watched two children in pre-
schools several hundred miles away. She gave the
providers suggestions to stimulate language and
then followed up weekly through videotape ex-
change. These alternatives allow us to deliver
personalized help in a timely manner without
spending hours traveling from program to program.
For more information contact:
Sarah Rule
Center for Persons with Disabilities
Utah State University
Logan, UT 84322-6805
settings.
As training begins, the first
issue addressed is the partici-
pants' attitudes and values
about disabilities. Addressing
attitudes and values first gives
participants the opportunity to
talk about their fears and
hopes, Trainees are asked to think about inclusion from
a personal perspective by remembering and describing a
time in their lives when they wanted to belong and felt
excluded. People describe powerful childhood memories
about being ridiculed in kindergarten, being excluded
from a team, and/or being teased about their ethnicity.
Through this exercise they remember the hurt of exclu-
sion and they begin to empathize with the feelings of
children in their care.
Next, participants complete a survey that asks them
to rate their responses to a series of statements about
inclusion such as:
E3 The parents of a child with disabilities should be able
to decide what placement and services their child
receives.
O For most children with disabilities inclusion works
only if there is extra adult help.
CI Inclusion is good for children with disabilities but the
other children usually do not benefit.
Teaching children with disabilities is much harder than
teaching typical children.
O Some children would be better off in separate more
specialized settings.
The group then discusses the range of responses. Be-
cause there are no right or wrong answers, this exercise
helps people clarify their own values and beliefs and
share their thinking with their colleagues. Teaming is
vital to the success of inclusion and this exercise also
helps the trainees understand and respect the values and
beliefs of their team members.
By working through this process of examining and
experiencing the power of attitudes and values about
disabilities, the teams come to a common core of beliefs
about inclusion. Team members then write a mission
statement that will serve to guide their goals and activi-
ties as they plan for inclusion.
For more information contact:
Y. Rab,
Community Connections Project
The-George_Washing,tonUniversity-
Department of Teacher Preparation and Special -Education
The Early Intervention Programs
2201 G Street N.W., Funger #524
Washington. D.C. 20052
(202) 994-5592
E3
5
11:WQT ryrrov
xte TT
TN
v-9

SPRING/SUMMER 1994
INCLUSION FORUM
VOL. 2, No. t
Early Childhood Inclusion Training Programs
Mainstreaming Young Children:
A Training Series for Child Care Providers
Pat Wesley, Partnerships for Inclusion
Frank Porter Graham Child Development Center
University of North Carolina
300 NationsBank Plaza 137 E. Franklin St. CB8040
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-8040
(919) 962-7364
Special Training for Special Needs
Cooperative Education Services Agency:
CESA 5
Portage Project
P.O. Box 564
Portage, Maine 53901
Including All Children: Training for
Administrators and Caregivers
AGH Associates, Inc.
Box 130
Hampton, New Hampshire 03842
SpecialCare Curriculum Trainer's Manual: A Resource
for Training Child Caregivers
Child Development Resources
P. 0. Box 299
Lightfoot, VA 23090
(804) 565-0303
Also Available
rz, 0 .
0 t -4
Publications
Training: The Magazine of Human R
Creative Training Techniques
Lakewood Publications, Inc.
50 South Ninth Street
Minneapolis. MN 55402
(800) 328-4329
Games Trainers Play: Experiential Le
Still More Games Trainers Play
John W. Newstrom
and Edward E. Scannell
McGraw Hill, Inc.
New York, New York
Training and Development Handbook:
A Guide to Human Resource Development
R. L. Craig, Editor
McGraw Hill. Inc.
New York. New York
Training and Development Journal
American Society for Training
and Development
1640 King Street Box 1443
Alexandria, VA 22313
(703) 683-8126
esources Development
arning Exercises
If there are issues
and concerns you
would like to see
addressed in the
Inclusion Forum
write to:
Inclusive Early Childhood Education: A Model Classroom
Marie Abraham. Lori Morris, & Penelope Wald
Communication Skill Builders
3830 E. Bellevue; P. 0. Box 42050-E 93
Tucson, AZ 85733; Phone: (602) 323-7500
Published by the
Community. Integration Project
Principal Investigator .... Maxine Freund
Director
Penny Wald
Staff
.......
......
Marie Abraham
....
.
..-. Lori Morris
Catherine Lethbridge
Newsletter Designer
....... Tommye Geil
Editorial Advisor
Bruce Kauffmann
Inclusion Forum is published semi-annually.
(4))
le
BUi
VA.'4.1.LL
Dept. of Teacher Preparation and Special Education
The George Washington University
2201 G Street, N.W., #524
Washington, D.C. 20052
BEST COPY AVAILABLE
If you
would like
to be a part of the
Inclusion Forum by
contributing information or
serving as a resource to other
programs, please send a brief
program description along
with a contact name
& telephone number
to:.
. _
Inclusion Forum
do Penny Wald
Dept. of Teacher Preparation
& Special Education
The George Washington University
2201 G Street., NW, #524
Washington, DC 20052
(703) 836-0723
The Community Integration Project (CIP), a federally funded
outreach project sponsored by The George Washington
University, supports the inclusion of children with disabilities
in early childhood programs. CIP assists LEAs and early
childhood programs in combining resources and acquiring
skills essential to quality inclusion.
This newsletter was developed under grant number H024D10019 with the
Office of Special Education and Rehabilitation Services. U.S. Department of
Education (OSERS/DOE). The content, however, does not necessarily reflect
the position or policy of OSERS/DOE, and no official endorsement of these
materials should be inferred.
Non-profit Org.
U.S. Postage
Paid
Washington, DC
Permit No. 593

CIP/The George Washington University Information Line
FALL/WINTER 1994
Vol.. 2, No. 2
SPOTLIGHT ON COLLABORATION
BUILDING A VISION FOR COLLABORATION
As communities strive to increase inclusive
options in early childhood education, the need
to pull together fragmented systems has raised
new issues for planners and practitioners. Rejoining a
fragmented system is not an easy task. Typically, a
community may begin by establishing an interagency
group with the mission of coordinating services to
families. This type of cooperative initiative simply
coordinates existing services and offers a reasonable
starting point for change. However, in localities where
the need and intent is to fundamentally change the ways
services are designed and delivered, a
collaborative strategy will be necessary
(Melaville and Blank, 1991). Whether a
partnership will be collaborative or coopera-
tive in nature depends on "how far partners
wish to move beyond the status quo"
(Melaville and Blank, 1991).
The existence of a common goal or
vision supports the notion of fundamental
change and is a defining feature of a true
collaboration. A shared vision requires
that collaborating parties express their personal beliefs
and build consensus around the issue they wish to
address. Participants in this process are challenged to
transcend their traditional roles and answer the question
"What do we want to create?" rather than "What do we
think we can do?". As service delivery barriers are
broken down, there is an opportunity to create an
inclusive vision and to have a collaboration where the
whole becomes greater than the sum of the parts. Senge
(1990) in his book The Fifth Discipline, states that a
shared vision can "create the spark, the excitement that
lifts an organization out of the mundane, . .. compel
courage so naturally that people don't even realize the
extent of their courage. .
. foster risk taking and
experimentation."
Collaboration may not always start with a clear
vision, but rather begin with a sense that something
needs to happen differently. The vision may not be
clearly articulated for some time. Vandercook, York
and Sullivan (1993) warn that engaging in a long-term
commitment without taking the time to build relation-
ships can be futile. Collaborations are fostered by
encouraging participants to work together on small
projects: offering opportunities to share philosophies,
learning to communicate effectively and experiencing
small successes. Collaboration is basically a people-to-
people process. It is essential to create strong bonds and
mutual respect between the collaborative partners as a
first step in building a shared vision.
Creating a meaningful vision is an exciting and
challenging task. To effectively sustain the commitment
of the collaborative partners to change, a shared vision
must include the deeply personal visions of each
participant as well as mutually held beliefs. When this
happens, a vision will be seen as both "my vision" and
"our vision" (Senge, 1990). Rowe (1992), developer of a
vision-driven, decision-making model for school
restructunng, suggests that change requires visions that
(1) are compelling, (2) are clear and (3) can be assessed.
"We will send a man to the moon in this decade" is a
classic statement of a vision that exemplifies
these criteria. So too are the visions "all
children can learn" or "all children can learn
in school environments that are fully
inclusive." Shared vision statements
such as these can change the way a
school system does business.
Collaboration is a process: it is not an end in itself.
A collaborative effort will look different each time it is
implemented. A specific model of collaboration cannot
be "parachuted" into a state, community or classroom. It
must be responsive to the culture of each new location
(Blank and Lombardi, 1991). Collaborations are
relationship-oriented and like all lasting relationships
take time to develop.
Lori M. Morris
Catherine Lethbridge
Community Integration Project
The George - Washington. University
Senge, P.M. 1990. The Fifth Discipline: the art and practice of the learning
organization. New York: Doubleday/Currency
Blank, M.J.. and Lombardi, J. 1991 Towards improved services for children
and families: forging new relationships through collaboration. White
Plains, New York: A.L. Mailman Foundation
Vandercook, T York, J. and Sullivan. B. 1993. True or false? Truly
collaborative relationships can exist between university and public school
personnel. OSERS News In Print. Washington, D.C.: United States
Department of Education
Melaville. A. and Blank, M. 1991. What it rakes: structuring interagency
partnerships to connect children and families with comprehensive services.
Washington. D.C.: Education and Human Services Consortium
Rowe. L. 1992. ODOM - A Process for Change. Journal of the National
7 Center for Outcome Based Education. Vol. 1 No.5
REST COPY AVAILABLE

PAGE 2
INCLUSION FORUM
FALL/WINTER 1994
COLLABORATION:
An Interpersonal Effort
Meeting House Cooperative Preschool is a
private community preschool in Alexandria,
Virginia. Since 1991, the school, in
collaboration with the Alexandria City Public Schools,
has offered inclusive placements for children with
disabilities. These children and their teachers are
provided support by a special educator from the
school system, who is on site at least two days per
week. Partnerships between the regular and special
educators require a variety of skills. In particular,
three interpersonal skills have facilitated
collaboration: communication, flexibility and
support.
Building rapport is an essential first step in
establishing good communication. At Meeting House,
initial meetings between the regular and special
educators focused on sharing vital information (e.g.,
curriculum, IEPs) and clarifying expectations.
Occasionally forms (e.g., role exchange form) were
used to expedite these discussions. In addition, team
members worked to develop a personal relationship.
Limited free time was used to engage in casual
conversations about ideas and concerns, helping to
strengthen rapport.
Teamwork requires flexibility in both principles
and practices. Regular and special educators often
view issues that arise in inclusive programs from
distinct perspectives. Being willing to reflect on
differences and remain open to adapting one's
practices helps to create a team approach. In one
Meeting House class, a child with disabilities was
having extreme difficulty during circle time. While the
classroom teacher did not want this child to be
separated, she agreed to the special educator's plan to
pull the child out of circle time. The time was used to
facilitate skills the child needed to participate in group
time and eventually he was able to join in circle time.
Support among team members is a basic
ingredient in successful collaborations. When there
are problems to be solved, they are tackled together
with each member contributing ideas and resources. In
order to recognize problems as well as progress, goals
must be defined. Goals may reflect objectives for
children or next steps necessary for team
development. With goals firmly in mind, the
challenges can be identified and addressed, and the
small steps made toward improvement can be
perceived and acknowledged.
8
Establishing communication, remaining flexible and
being supportive enabled the Meeting House staff to create
a shared vision and meet the challenges the inclusion
program presents.
For more information contact:
Joan Wheeler & Beth Fedman
Meeting House Cooperative Preschool
316 South Royal Street
Alexandria, VA 22314
DEVELOPING COLLA:.
To Promote Inc
community teams
The Inclusion through
Transdisciplinary Team
project (ITT) at the
University of Idaho provides
technical assistance to
communities of professionals
and parents who strive to
promote inclusive lives for
all young children. Examples
of
include Interagency
Council Committees, Head Start
regional offices, and state departments
of education. ITT's organizational
approach to inclusion emphasizes the
collaboration of persons representing
different disciplines. A major
characteristic of these teams is the
wide range of perspectives toward
inclusion by its members.
Working with a diverse group of
persons presents both opportunities
and challenges. Collaborative efforts
are more effective than individual
efforts. However, members' resistance
to change often impedes
collaboration. Commonly encountered
sources of resistance and strategies for
overcoming them are listed in Figure
1 at right.
We often facilitate team collaboration by having
members learn and appreciate each other's views.
Nonproductive arguing endangers relationships. By
helping people to understand other perspectives, we
remove sources of argument. We do this through a five-
step process.
Source Of Resistance
No .perceived benefit
Fear of incapability
Anxiety over uncertain
outcomes
Fear of budget loss or
salary change
Fear of lost
responsibility or
authority
BEST COPY AVAILABLE

VOL. 2, No. 2
INCLUSION FORUM
PAGE 3
WELCOME EVERYWHERE:
Inclusive Communities for Young Children
Welcome Everywhere: Inclusive Communities for
Young Children with Disabilities is a project
designed to facilitate collaborative relationships
and networks that result in inclusive programs and activities
throughout communities. The Welcome Everywhere project
supports building local capacity for inclusion through (1)
administrative commitment, (2) involvement of a variety of
stakeholders and (3) the availability of training and technical
assistance. The project is conducted by the Center for
ORATIVE ORGANIZATIONS
lusive Communities
Prepare for developing the team: Members learn as much as
possible about each other, including their perceptions. Ways to
do this include assuming each others' positions; active
listening exercises; role playing; and sharing perceived
strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and barriers in regard to
efforts toward inclusion.
Set the tone for the team: Identify interests common to all
members through focus groups.
Define the team's purpose: Focus on common interests and
mutual concerns, not solutions. One way
to do this is by developing a mission
statement.
Generate options: Create several options
while avoiding obstacles such as premature
judgment or belief in a single solution. At
this time, goals should be formalized and
prioritized.
Evaluate options and reach consensus:
Establish criteria for making decisions and
initiate development of action plans.
We view team operations as a series of
sequences that occur within the contexts of
team development and crisis response.
These are (1) team formation, (2) storming
(exploring different perspectives), (3) setting
team behavior norms, and (4) performance.
Finally, we believe that some conflict is
good, as it helps to facilitate team action.
For more information contact:
Jennifer Olson, Ph.D.
Inclusion through Transdisciplinary Teaming
Idaho Center on Developmental Disabilities
129 West Third Street
University of Idaho
Moscow, ID 83843
(208) 885-6605
Strategies
Increase knowledge
Involve in planning
Offer financial support
Offer training
Build on strengths
Use active listening
Expose to other successful
inclusive communities
Involve in planning
Insure financial support
Adjust role expectations
Emphasize positive
aspeCts of change
Figure 1
BEST COPY AVAILABLE
Innovative Practices for Young Children at the University
Affiliated Program of Indiana.
A major goal of the project is to promote inclusion in
education and non-education settings throughout a
community. This goal has prompted a unique aspect of the
projectthe establishment of local Inclusion Networks.
An Inclusion Network is comprised of citizens represent-
ing a variety of organizations reflecting each community's
unique strengths and resources. Network membership
usually includes parents, educators, health professionals,
social service providers, clergy, business persons and local
government officials. The Inclusion Network meets over a
period of twelve to eighteen months (four or five meet-
ings) to carry out the following project-related activities:
the development of a Community Vision Statement
the identification of Issues and Barriers to inclusion
the development of Action Plans to address issues and
barriers
the identification of agencies and individuals to receive
Inclusion Network information
Specific formats, tailored to individual communities, are
followed to facilitate the activities.
The success of the Inclusion Networks has been
attributed to several factors, including the opportunity to
work with a broad coalition of community members; the
opportunity to consider new and different ways to address
issues and barriers; and productive, fast paced meetings.
As one participant noted, "It is a unique opportunity to
expand views and promote change-attitudes about children
with disabilities and their families can be dramatically
altered and gaps can be filled. [It provided] a much needed
forum for awareness."
The function and outcomes of Inclusion Networks
differ from formal networks such as local interagency
coordinating councils. By combining existing local
associations and informal/formal networks associated with
early childhood special education programs and agencies,
Inclusion Networks have established and promoted
inclusive practices across communities. The activities of
each Network seem to have a ripple effect. Members
indicate they share information with other people in the
community. Those members, representing businesses and
community organizations, have reported changes made in
their practices to ensure the inclusion of children with
disabilities and their families.
For more information contact:
Georgia Sheriff
Center for Innovative Practices for Young Children
Institute for Study of Developmental Disabilities
2853 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47408
(812) 855-6508
9

FAu./WirrrEn 1994
INCLUSION FORUM
VOL. 2, No. 2'
unelin
Training Models
Best Practices in Integration (BPI) Inservice Training Model
Susan M. Klein
Department of Curriculum and Instruction
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405-1006
(812) 856-8167
Partnerships in Early Intervention: A Training Guide on Family-
Centered Care Team Building and Service Coordination
Waisman Center Early Intervention Programs
1500 Highland Avenue, Room 231, Madison, WI 53705
(608) 263-5022
Videos
The Business of Paradigms
Joel Barker
Chart House Learning Corporation
221 River Ridge Circle, Burnsville, MN 55337
Available through Inclusion through Transdisciplinary Teaming:
Stages of Group Development (1994)
Teaming (1994)
Resistance to Change (1994)
Jennifer Olson
Idaho Center on Developmental Disabilities
University of Idaho, Moscow, ID 83843
(208) 885-6849
Also Available
Inclusive Early Childhood Education: A Model Classroom
Marie Abraham, Lori Morris, & Penelope Wald
Communication Skill Builders
3830 E. Bellevue; P. 0. Box 42050-E 93
Tucson. AZ 85733; Phone: (602) 323-7500
Publiehed by the
C
munIty Integration Project
Principal Investigator .... Maxine Freund
Director
Penny Wald
Staff
.
. Marie Abraham
.
Lori Morris
---...Catherine Lethbridge
Newsletter DeSigner.........-.Tommye Geil
Editorial Advisor ----Bruce Kauffman
Inclusion ForuM is published semi-annually.
.
_
Uailitro7Z6141
L.V.ALLLII
Dept. of Teacher Preparation and Special Education
The George Washington University
2201 G Street, N.W., #524
Washington, D.C. 20052
Publications
A Community Approach to an Integrated Service System for Children
with Special Needs (1988)
R. Hazel. P. Barber, S. Roberts, S. Behr, E. Helmstetter, and D. Guess
Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes Publishing Company
(800) 638-2775
The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organization
(1990) Peter M. Senge
New York: Doubleday
The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People
(1989) Stephen R. Covey
New York: FiresideSimon and Schuster
Together We Can: A Guide for Crafting A
Education and Human Services (1993)
A. I. Melaville, M. Blank, & G. Asayesh
U. S. Government Printing Office
Superintendent of Documents
Mail Stop: SSOP
Washington, DC 20402-9328
If there are issues
and concerns you
would like to see
addressed in the
Inclusion Forum
write to:
Profamily System of
If you
would like
to be a part of the
Inclusion Forum by
contributing information or
serving as a resource to other
programs, please send a brief
program description along
with a contact name
&telephone number
to:
Inclusion Forum
do Penny Wald
Dept. of Teacher Preparation
& Special Education
The George Washington University
2201 G Street., NW, #524
Washington, DC 20052
(703) 836-0723
This newsletter was developed under grant number H024D10019 with the
Office of Special Education and Rehabilitation Services, U.S. Department of
Education (OSERS/DOE). The content, however, does not necessarily reflect
the position or policy of OSERS/DOE, and no official endorsement of these
materials should be inferred.
10
Non-profit Org.
U.S. Postage
Paid
Washington, DC
Permit No. 593
BEST COPY AVAILABLE

(9/92)
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OEM)
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC)
NOTICE
REPRODUCTION BASIS
1ERICI
This document is covered by a signed "Reproduction Release
(Blanket)" form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore,
does not require a "Specific Document" Release form.
This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release
form (either "Specific Document" or "Blanket").
